and so then when i ask you the question
like is your dad proud of you and you're
like i don't know what difference that
would make dude it's going to make all
the difference
i think i'd know how to process that
even if he did
say it you're damn right you don't which
is the entire problem
right because like how do you process
that which you've never heard before
uh yeah oh hey hey man
yeah that um last interview was march of
last year
actually okay so so and we are following
up with you right i have the right
asriel
yes okay yeah so i was gonna say like
now that i i see the face i remember so
we talked about
social anxiety or something or
confidence
i think we talked about overthinking
okay
so you know when i have to do something
and then like i'll generate all these
thoughts about what could go wrong
okay so can you fill us in a little bit
about um
in a little bit more detail about what
we covered last week
i mean last our last year
um i don't know it's a long time ago
i think we talked a lot about sort of
success and failure
and like feeling destined to succeed or
fail
okay um there was
i don't know okay so tell us
how have you been over the last year and
a half it's been about 15 months right
something like that um i don't know
there's been a lot that's going on
so i've done coaching okay and i
you know i think i mentioned last stream
that like i was switching majors to
physics
i ended up dropping out of physics and
switching back to marine biology
okay and then with the help of the
therapist
i actually managed to finish second year
a few months ago okay and
i got back into coaching a few months
ago in the high performance group
okay cool so so it sounds like you've
been and how do you feel about
how do you feel about stuff
um so it was definitely
very rough in the beginning i think i
like like just so much has happened that
i'm definitely feeling a lot better now
than i was
um i don't know it's i've been focusing
a lot on self-improvement and just
getting better
and improving myself and you know
feeling my emotions and trying to
you know take action in my life so
that's for you man yeah so
this you want to say something go ahead
um yeah so i'm kind of if i remember
because it has been a while
um i if i remember correctly you were
very
externally concerned like your mind
would think about what would happen
yeah right so like you can do
does that ring i mean can you share with
us because like remind me a little bit
if you remember because i know it's been
like over a year but
like if i'm just remembering like notes
of the conversation about like
you know you'd be concerned that this
would happen and it wouldn't go well and
like you may not do well and things like
that
yeah um sort of like i'm very i was very
outcome oriented where it was like
you know i'm trying to put my best
quality
work and like i got to do my best and
everything
and um
yeah so i think there's a lot of anxiety
that i can build up
about doing a particular task and making
it
you know work and something that i can
be proud of um i think there is a lot of
fear
around how other people perceive me if i
mess up or fail
um so i have social anxiety as well
um not online it's only like in real
life which is
interesting so okay
um and and so has that changed for you
at all asriel about being
outcome oriented or
yeah so when i was in coaching and in
therapy
i started to get my life together and it
was interesting because
you know all these things were sort of
you know i was doing school
i was taking better care of myself but
the emotions did not change i still felt
terrible for a long time and
sort of like well this isn't working i
don't know what's going on i've done
everything and i think i realized that
problem was that i wasn't addressing the
underlying
sort of emotions and what i was feeling
i was just sort of trying to push past
it
to do what i needed to do
and what what kind of emotion was
underlying can you
help us understand that
well i think there was definitely fear
uh hopelessness
uh loneliness sadness um
frustration frustration at like feeling
all those things
um yeah
just uh yeah all sorts of stuff
and asriel forgive do you prefer asriel
by the way or do you want me to call you
something else
i guess it's up to you azrael or thomas
what do you prefer whatever you prefer
my dude
all right well online i usually just go
by azrael
okay so asriel i'm going to play devil's
advocate for a second okay
all right so you're saying that like so
you started to put your life together
right you you went into coaching you got
into therapy
um so it sounds like you did one batch
of coaching one round of therapy
and then a second batch of coaching yeah
and so
the funny thing there is that like
you're saying that like you started
putting your life together so you were
like back in school maybe you were like
doing stuff
but internally you still felt awful
and so like my question to you is is it
the point of going to therapy that it's
supposed to fix the
internal stuff like how does that work
that externally things are going well
and internally like don't you go to
therapy and doesn't that fix the
internal
stuff isn't that how it works
well i i don't know it was
when i was in therapy it was
you know i told my therapist what my
goals were to
finish school and everything and they
were gonna help me with that
um i don't know i found therapy it was
um so we only had like half an hour
every week to talk
and i found it was mostly just me
recapping what happened that week and
then the therapist would provide
occasional input
but it was mostly just and then they
would validate
or talk about whatever i was feeling and
like maybe
point out thought distortions and all
that
and i think i used that to sort of
help me progress but i didn't use it to
sort of address the underlying feelings
necessarily
and so once you had that realization
which is a big one
how do you feel about your therapy
experience are you kind of happy with it
or
so when i finished school i felt like i
got everything i needed out of therapy
like you know we discussed everything
that i thought i was ever
really going to need from it so i it was
getting expensive and i
basically quit um
[Music]
yeah what was the question again i was
just curious about whether you were
happy with your therapy experience
uh mixed feelings so i definitely think
it helped
i don't think it did everything that i
thought it would do
okay and can you help me understand um
well so let's start what what did you
want it to do that it didn't do
i think i wanted to
i don't know just be more
at peace with myself maybe uh less
stressed less anxious
i think it did help with that it's just
that
because it was only for five months
there was only so much
progress that we could have made um
it was interesting because when i was in
therapy we were talking about how like
you know i'm working so hard i'm doing
all this stuff and it's not enough
and my therapist was like oh wait a
minute this is insane you're
you're thriving in a pandemic when most
of my clients are like
fish out of water it's like
so i think part of therapy was just
recognizing when i was pushing myself
too hard or not
acknowledging you know what i had
accomplished and just
looking at how far i've come so maybe
one of the thought distortions
yeah i guess so and i think we also had
um
uh i have a lot of shits so like i
should be doing this i should be doing
that so he discussed that
yeah so asriel it sounds like you've
come a long way
yeah i'd say so okay so you would own
that
as opposed to definitely
okay um and can you help me understand
what the experience of coaching was like
versus therapy and and how the two
are different or similar
so with coaching um the first
um coaching i did it was
you know me and a group of other people
that maybe we were
unfamiliar with our emotions we didn't
really know what we were doing in life
and we were just trying to figure things
out i think
coaching was very good at
i'd say it's actually like um because
coaching got me into therapy
where we discussed you know how our week
was going and
again i am devaluing all the stuff that
i did that week and
they would stop me and say hey actually
that's pretty amazing like good job
and i'd be like can't do anything like
what are you talking about
so i don't know i think we worked
through that there was
definitely some practical skills like
reflective listening
um recognizing
you know emotions um
stuff like that and then that got me
into therapy which is more
one-on-one um i had
someone for better help and they were
very good at
what's it called the
i i had it now i forgot
the cognitive behavioral therapy i think
it's called okay yeah
cbt sounds like it with thought
distortions
yeah and so i think that was sort of a
continuation
of you know where i left off with
coaching
and then once therapy was too expensive
when i finished school and
i still felt like i needed to talk to
people so i got back into coaching
in the high performance group because i
felt like i
sort of progressed past the regular
coaching by that point
sure and what's that experience are you
still doing the
high performance group yeah and how's
that going
that's pretty good i think i feel um
in the group and we've discussed this is
that
you know i'm the youngest member i'm
still in school
most of them have jobs and so maybe i
just feel a little bit
i i asreel i've i've heard about you
i'm now i heard about the group that
you're in
if i remember correctly so i heard that
there was someone in one of the high
performance groups that was really
confused about what they were doing
there
is that you that's probably me and how
do you feel about it now
my is pretty good actually yeah
i'm hap i'm really happy to hear that so
i i if i could just share this so i
i heard so i i sort of hear about i
i don't know if you guys uh know this
but you know i work
we do have like a model where i work
with your coaches
on a weekly basis and so i i hear about
you know challenges or situations
in the different groups and i'll kind of
like weigh in so i heard there was one
group that you know has like ceos and
people who like have real careers and
there was one person who's very young
who was really confused about what they
were doing i don't know if that was you
or if that you know maybe every group
has
one person that feels like they don't
belong um
but i you know so i did sort of hear
about that and and what do you think
about being in the group now
it's um it's a pretty good experience um
i like it i i have a lot to contribute
even if i'm the youngest member um
and it's going to just share my opinion
yeah do you feel like the other group
members respect you
yeah i think so so that that makes me
really happy to hear asriel because i i
think the
goal of group is to have someone like
you and come in
and feel like like that's exactly what
we're here to work on right like so you
come into a situation you're like oh
all of these people are better than me
and the goal of group
is like we're gonna work on you in the
group until you no longer feel that way
you can honestly acknowledge that yes
these people are actually objectively
further along in life than i am and yet
it's okay for me to be here that i can
still make meaningful contributions that
something about my experience can still
help other people
that i can still help them and they can
still help me and so if you feel like
you belong there like i'm really happy
to hear that because i don't think i
ever got an update i just stopped
hearing about it so i just
sort of assumed that things had gotten
better but if you know if you
anyway if you do have challenges feel
free to bring them up in the group and
then i i think i'll
wind up hearing about them if there's a
you know concern or problem
um all right but
yeah go ahead i think more recently with
me trying to find a job this summer
uh i don't know i it brought up a lot of
feelings of sort of inadequacy
like they all have jobs and here i am i
had an
emotional breakdown like in front of the
job site and it's like i can't even get
a job and i'm in this group
so yes it brought up some of those
feelings again
yeah so it sounds like once again the
feelings are down there sorry i didn't
mean to laugh but i was just
you know despite all the progress we
just talked about i really commend you
for saying
but by the way it's not entirely fixed
and yes you know azrael just to say like
that's how
growth happens you know it's sort of
like when i think about
you know even like playing a game like
do you do you play games or
yeah absolutely yeah what do you play
minecraft
i've done a lot of star blasts dot io
which
yeah it's uh sort of you know you're a
spaceship and you go around and mine
asteroids and upgrade your spaceship
and there's different game modes you can
play in a team
survival mode um capture the flag all
sorts of stuff
interesting um yeah it's just an online
browser game so
so when i kind of think about games you
know when you're
playing a game like you may not master
something right away right like there's
the first time you learn how to do
something
and then you screw up a couple times and
then like you do it again
and then you screw up fewer times and
then you do it again and then you screw
up maybe once and then you do it again
and then eventually like you have it
down and what i'm hearing from you is
almost a similar pattern within group
where
like you're gonna feel an inferior
right and there are objective reasons
why
i don't think you should feel inferior
as a human but in terms of experience
like
you may be the least experienced person
in the group but someone's got to be the
least experienced person in the group
and at the same time you know how can
you
grow and understand that and then also
like you're going to have breakdowns in
front of the the job hunting page like
that's totally like normal
actually right no it wasn't the job
hunting page i actually got a job
i just never showed up oh my goodness
yeah i went to i went to the area where
the job was and then i was supposed to
contact someone but i never did
um i don't know i feel a little bit
guilty about it
and like it was weird because like
nobody even
called me or asked me where i was and
it's been
a few weeks now i showed up like like
two other times but i never actually was
able
to get into the job so
it was a general labor job and i think i
just have doubts about
whether or not i'll be able to handle it
and maybe
about working with other people there
especially because i've shown up in a
few days
so yeah
when were you supposed to start your job
um
[Music]
today is the 25th
okay so yeah it's been a long time
and no one's even contacted me to like
fire me or ask me where i am
so i'm just looking for another job now
have you contacted them
no do you want to work there
not anymore
what's changed
i i don't know i just feel like i messed
up
i don't think they'd want me back after
not showing up for a few weeks
um i feel like they probably moved on
and found someone else by now
so i don't see a reason to show to go
back there
i think um that i can find
different work something maybe i'll be
better
able to manage are you concerned about
being able to manage this job
yeah i think so it's full time so
i think it's 10 hours a day and so it's
a big commitment
and you know i'm not sure
if i'm ready for that okay
i tried at least like i tried to
show up and everything sounds like it
was a bit too much for you
maybe i'm good at pushing myself past my
boundaries though
that's i'm happy to hear you say that
like showing up there was definitely
pushing my boundaries already
yep i completely agree man
so sometimes i'll work with people about
going to the gym
you know they'll want to go to the gym
and like there are different ways to not
go to the gym
there's the oh i'd wish i want to go and
then never signing up for anything then
they're signing up for stuff
then there's waking up the morning of
and not going then there's actually
getting in your car and then deciding
[ __ ] this
and getting out of your car and there's
getting in your car
driving to the parking lot waiting in
the parking lot for five minutes with an
existential crisis
and then driving home and then there's
walking in and feeling like an idiot if
you walk out so you might as well just
like
check in completely because the person
behind the desk is like who is this
person who's walking in the door turns
around and walks out
and then the embarrassment is going with
you and then you kind of like enter the
gym and then you're like
it would be dumb to just turn around and
walk out now so i might as well like
work out a little bit
there are various phases you know we
kind of think about going to the gym or
not going to the gym is like binary
right
but the truth is that there's actually
like a progress bar
in terms of like getting a job and even
in terms of like not showing up for the
job
there's so many ways you cannot show up
you cannot apply you cannot interview
you can show up on your first day have
an existential crisis turn around and
leave
you know and i know it sounds weird but
like that's honestly how it works
i wish it was simpler i wish it was less
painful but
you know yeah
i don't know i've had a lot of those
types of experiences
i don't know since two years ago
since second year university um
just trying to figure out everything
with
living on my own doing university
in a pandemic trying to feed myself
trying to
you know figure out income money
um all that stuff so
it's been a lot of work yeah man
i i it sounded like your therapist felt
like you were thriving
in a pandemic yeah i think i made a lot
of progress for sure
i i can certainly i don't really
remember a lot of the details of our
conversation as
real but i certainly rem i don't
remember
seeing this degree of confidence in you
like there are certain statements that
you've made where i really get the sense
that you kind of acknowledge where you
are
you accept how far you've come because i
i get the impression that you used to
make statements that would like devalue
your progress
like you have to say you know like like
you just made a statement a little while
ago that i'm good at pushing past my
boundaries
whereas i feel like a year ago you would
have said i need to be better at pushing
past my boundaries or i don't push
myself past my boundaries enough
i think even back then i was pushing
myself
a lot that's why i was sort of
well like even getting on stream and
stuff that was
pushing myself past my boundaries back
then
it was a lot
um
i i don't know i guess
the difference is just that i've had
more time to actually do that
and figure out what i'm good at what i'm
not good at
how everything works yeah
it sounds like you've been doing a lot
of self-reflection and understanding
yourself quite a bit yeah
absolutely i've been you know watching
your videos like
pretty much every single one since
like since reckful
have those been helpful yeah absolutely
um i don't know you get a lot of um
all sorts of people with
going through all their own struggles
and just listening to it all
and figuring out how it applies to me
and
trying to integrate that into how i
approach
my problems i find it very helpful
i'm happy to hear that i'm happy to hear
it's been helpful you know i never
really know
i'm pretty sure i feel pretty confident
about the person that i talk to but i'm
i've always been curious
just as a clinician because i've seen
impact when i work with people
individually
i've always just been like a little bit
curious about
how much benefit you can get from
watching a youtube video
or like watching like real benefit you
know like sure you can get entertained
maybe you can pick up a little bit of
like
neat information here or there but can
you actually change your life
and i find myself being skeptical
hey yes uh and i mean it hasn't just
been you i mean
you know i follow one other twitch
streamer
wyover and um you know if i ever need a
place to go to just
you know hang out and chill and have fun
i can go there and
given that's just a huge difference
and more recently even in the healthy
gamer discord i'm in
talking with people in chill chat and
it's nice to get out of my head
sometimes
yeah why uber is fantastic dude i love
what he does on twitch
yeah um so asriel can you tell me a
little bit you said that for a long time
you were like doing stuff
outwardly and like actually making
progress in your life but you were sort
of not
recognizing or acknowledging emotions
how did you can you tell me a little bit
about that
yeah so when i am doing something
um if it's outside my comfort zone what
i'll notice
is you know a bunch of emotions her eyes
there'll be fear anxiety
social anxiety worry you know whatever
and then how i actually deal with that
is to overcome
all those emotions with frustration i
can use that to sort of
suppress everything and just push
through
and the problem with that is that you
know it provides a temporary buff
at that time but then you got to deal
with all that stuff later
so interesting so so it sounds like
you've gotten good at pushing yourself
past your comfort zone but it's still a
push
it's not easy it requires like a lot of
effort
and i'm also hearing it has a cost
yeah absolutely um
i think that's where the devaluing comes
in it's like
you know i i should be capable of doing
this by now
like why am i so bad um
and sort of using that to overcome those
emotions and just
you know i think that's the sort of
toxicity
of maybe toxic productivity
uh mindset where you know i'm just
beating myself up to get
something done yeah idea
you really have been watching a lot of
stuff and learning
as well um
yeah so where are you i mean is that
something that you want to talk about
today or potentially something we can
work on or did you have
thoughts about you know how how this
conversation or go is
something i can help you with today
oh i think what i wanted to take away
hopefully was just how to
maybe make that process a little easier
on myself
that i'm not constantly struggling
so much with everything
that maybe be a little bit easier
um maybe just to be more at peace with
my decisions not get so stressed out
okay can i just collect my thoughts for
a second
sure
i would really love to help you navigate
that asriel let me just think about
how to do that
okay let me just toss a couple things
out okay you let me know if we're kind
of on the same page or not
so there's some kind of emotion let's
say fear
um lack of confidence something like
that excuse me
i made the mistake of having pizza for
lunch i've been eating healthier
but today
so you know you have some kind of
emotion
right some kind of lack of confidence
and then what happens
is you practice
some kind of frustration or
self-loathing
you start beating yourself up you're
saying oh i should be better than this
and the interesting thing is that's
somewhat of a double-edged sword because
like
if you feel ashamed you can actually use
shame as motivation
you say like why am i so bad at this i
should just i should be able to do it
and so then you force yourself you push
through
that pile of emotion you there's one
negative emotion that
is keeping you from doing it and then
you kind of
you know fill up your engines with shame
and then you use that shame to overcome
and then you end up actually making
progress in your life which is great
but but there's something incredibly
like not peaceful about that
right and this is where the toxic
productivity comes in because when you
use
negative emotions to fuel your
productivity like
there's a toxic feel to it
um so
you know i think what we can try to talk
about today is like trying to
understand how to disarm that negative
emotion
in to begin with so the interesting
thing is
you may be able to cultivate better
sources of motivation
but if we think about you need shame to
succeed right now
you need it right and it's it's
necessary to
overcome that hump of
whatever the negative emotion is so if
we can process
and get rid of what's underneath you'll
need shameless
and so you can learn an alternate
fueling strategy
or what you can do is require less fuel
by like making the challenge a little
bit better
and i do think that you're you've
clearly worked hard as real and you're
pretty insightful so i think that maybe
like that's something that we could work
on today what do you think
for sure and i'd also like to add um
when i do disarm that sort of shame
it just means that i don't really do
anything that's where the
thoughts of like you know what's the
point why bother
start coming up yep right so like you're
saying like when i
empty my engines i don't move anywhere
and we're like
absolutely man so it's tough it's tough
okay
so the first thing that i just want to
acknowledge is that
if you keep doing what you're doing
asriel i think you'll continue doing
fine and you will eventually feel better
so like i do think that
emotionally it sounds like you actually
made a lot of progress
and so the first thing that i kind of
want to point out to everyone is
sometimes people ask like
despite making progress why does it
continue to be hard
and so this is where like i'm going to
use like an online matchmaking analogy
despite getting better at the game why
is my win rate still close to 50
right so the challenge here asriel is
that you're getting better
but you're also like dealing with more
so as you like you know start doing well
in school and now you're looking for a
job and like now you're doing therapy
and like even like
you know you're actually like the
challenges that you're leveling up but
like
the monsters you're fighting or like
leveling up with you
and it's not actually that they're
leveling up with you it's just that
you're going
deeper and deeper into the game of life
where things get
harder and harder so you're actually
like objectively making progress
and like you're climbing that mountain
right so like the better you get it
climbing
the higher you go the thinner the air
gets and
what it feels like is like you're making
no progress
so that's just the first thing to
understand okay so like
you know anyway so at some point you'll
equilibriate out because i mean either
you'll
you know climb towards i don't know what
but generally speaking at some point
like you'll have you know like a job
hopefully you'll have like a good
relationship hopefully you'll have a
good social circle
and then you kind of chill and then you
like look back on your life and you're
like wow i've made a lot of progress and
actually i'm pretty happy
and even if we hear you talk it sounds
like in a lot of ways you feel like
really
like confident in yourself you can
accept yourself and be proud of some of
your accomplishments
and there's a bunch of crap still
lingering down there so we're going to
get to that i just wanted to
share that does that make sense yeah i
think that makes sense
so the reason it feels like we're
constantly struggling not making
progress
is actually because we are progressing
um so let me ask you when it comes to
the job
okay when you were when they
i'm gonna toss something out i'm gonna
guess that the fact that no one
called you may have been the worst part
of the experience
what do you think about that
yeah i i agree there was no input i
couldn't
gauge the situation it was hard to tell
you know if they were mad or if they
were concerned
if they even cared about me
i don't know i felt like maybe i wasn't
actually that important
yeah and so
what what do you what do you how do you
understand that
uh
i don't know it's just
i don't think i am necessarily
particularly important to anyone but
myself really i mean
i would be a little bit selfish to think
that
anyone else really cares about me i mean
maybe my family i guess
but maybe some people online
but it's mostly just me so
how does it feel to be unimportant to
the rest of the world
i mean it sort of sucks i guess
maybe i feel a little sad and lonely
like nothing i do is gonna change that
i think that's sort of where the
feelings of
hopelessness comes from yeah and i think
also that feeds into
i have nihilistic thoughts
um so
sort of the belief that like you know
what's the point of doing anything if
i'm just gonna die and
no one's gonna care right
yeah so i think somewhere along the way
people
my understanding is that people have
lost a big part
of nihilism whereas i i thought the
point of nihilism is that
that you can't rely on
an external objective standard for
meaning and purpose
so it doesn't mean that there isn't any
meaning and purpose it means that
you have to sort of carve it out
yourself
and that like there isn't like a like
there isn't like a you know
omnipotent god that is going to give you
meaning
and that yeah yeah i agree um
but i don't know i don't think i'd want
anyone to
i don't know i don't like the idea of
some
higher being controlling my life
so before we get you know down the road
of philosophy which if you want to go
down we can
i'm going to ask you though asriel how
long have you felt how long have you
been
unimportant
i don't know like
forever maybe fourth grade i guess
why do you have fourth grade
well might have been before that too but
in
fourth grade that was when my parents
split up um and then
it's the weirdest thing my dad was
driving me to school one day and like
you know we show up to school and
they're like oh you're not registered at
this school anymore
and it turns out that my mom had just
changed my school
so we had to show up at a different
school tonight
i had no idea my dad had no idea
and i don't know i feel like from
that point onward things were different
so i was living between you know both
parents switching houses
um i
my mom was trying to find someone new
and
you know my dad was always busy with
work um
you know i had siblings and they were
always
better than me at everything so they
always got credit
um my mom eventually found someone new
but they you know they were dealing with
their own problems
and they had a lot of
maybe bad coping mechanisms
so like you know they drink and they
take out their frustration on
us which wasn't
very nice um i don't know
i just i felt like i had to prove myself
that i had to do
everything just to get noticed
and i didn't really feel too important
in the chaos that turned out to be
growing up
how does it feel to talk about this
stuff
um
i don't know it's i can definitely feel
there's an emotion down there of sadness
maybe
i don't know it's difficult i sort of
learned to
do everything on my own and i haven't
really had anyone to help me along the
way which just
sucks
yeah i'm i'm sort of feeling an immense
amount of pity
what do you think about that
oh how would you describe pity
great question
so i feel sorrow for
the person that you the kid that you
used to be
yeah i think so
so when you say sadness
is that sadness for yourself or sadness
for your former self
well listen to sort of both because
my former self shaped who i am today
yeah and in a sense it's sort of like
i'm still you know walking that path
so
so can you hmm
can you tell me okay hold on
i'm i'm trying to decide if i can do
something a little bit unorthodox with
you asriel because
you've watched stream so much so let's
let's let's
try to be a little bit unorthodox okay
can i
i'm gonna need your help because this
may fail miserably
okay so we'll fail together so
when you started talking about you said
your mom started looking for someone
and then you mentioned the person and
then the first thing that you said about
them is they had their own
struggles
what are you doing yeah
maybe
see maybe i'm deflecting the blame
absolutely right so you've watched
stream a fair amount
so when someone comes on and says oh
they had their own struggles
life was hard they were addicted to
alcohol
what does that person what do we what do
we know about that situation what can we
infer about that situation
when someone comes on stream and starts
saying things like that protecting
someone
am i allowed to protect them a little
more
yeah so i don't think they were
addicted to alcohol i just think when
they were in a bad mood they had a
tendency to drink a lot
okay does that make things better or
worse for you
well i think it's just how i was able to
tell whether
you know whether i should be careful or
not when i got home
how do you feel about blaming them
well it's hard because like you know
they can be abusive sometimes but then
sometimes you know
they're sort of a great person like that
is a mixed
mixed bag i guess so it's hard to blame
them when they
i can recognize that they're
that they're not all bad right
if they were pure evil then it'd be easy
one would think
um and so i know this sounds kind of
weird as real but like
you know in my experience there's a
certain amount of blame
there's like almost like you know 100
points of blame
in people's lives and generally speaking
it gets distributed right so i think
some people who are like narcissistic
will put a hundred points of the blame
on other people
and then you know where i'm going with
this
you're put 100 points on myself what do
you think
accurate right
and it's kind of interesting because
like i think when we think about like
a lack of like you know how long have
you felt not
valuable well like where does that
feeling of not being valuable
com like how does that you know that
feels to me very similar to the way that
you
if you've been blaming yourself every
time you do that you decrease your
internal value
and then when someone doesn't call you
after you don't show up for a job
interview what your mind tells you is
like see they didn't care about you
anyway like you're not even worth it
they don't give a [ __ ]
it doesn't matter what like i am i have
no impact on the outside world
they're gonna live their lives and
whether i'm there or not there whether i
exist or not exist
the world doesn't really care no one
really cares
i'm insignificant that's what your mind
tells you
yeah it's um
pretty much yeah
so i think they're how do you feel right
now you feeling okay
yeah i think i think i'm all right
okay
let me know okay if we're pushing past
your boundaries
if we get to that point we're like oh my
god i'm so weak
i should be able to have another session
with dr k
you let me know if you start thinking
that way okay
all right can i trust you there bro
i think so okay good all right let's
keep going
so tell me a little bit about
do you know why your parents split up
yeah i talked to my mom a little bit
about it i think
for her she just didn't feel like she
was getting
[Music]
like there were there was no
sort of emotional connection so maybe
she felt a little emotionally neglected
cause my dad was always busy with work
and you know he is a very practical
type of person um get things done
all that um so maybe
he's very busy i'd say i mean he runs
his own
engineering company and that's a lot of
work in itself
you know he had a family um
he was a scout leader um
so yeah
he just does a lot and maybe he didn't
have as much
time to spend with her and
maybe that made her feel
a little bit neglected
so i notice you're providing reasoning
again
right so you're you're hypothesizing why
he wasn't able to meet her emotional
needs
i see that accurate i'm sure it's
accurate
i don't is that what do you ever think
about
did you feel like your dad was there for
you emotionally
no and why not
hard to describe it's like
like he wasn't he wasn't
like he's always busy of course he cares
like if i had a problem let's say i'm
doing badly in school there was no
understanding there was no connection it
was just like you need to do better like
get get your work done like this is
unacceptable
you know smart enough
i think there was no understanding there
i guess
and what do you think about that
well i know that i'm going to provide
reasons
why you know
and then deflect the blame but i just
don't want to blame him for it because
don't know why don't you want to blame
him good
so let's you're doing well asriel i'm
not gonna force you to blame him
do you feel like i'm bashing your dad
no okay
i don't know i just i respect him he
does
i may be a tiny bit but
yeah he does a lot of stuff
and he's a very hard worker
and it's hard to blame him he's doing
everything he can
where does that leave you that he's
doing everything that he can but tells
you to smarten up when you're struggling
yes i just learned to deal with it
and how did you learn to deal with it
by getting things done
yeah right pushing through setting aside
your feelings who cares
your emotions have no value asriel
smarten up
push through screw your boundaries
sound familiar the same philosophy he
applies to himself
he pushes himself a lot too
and i'm noticing that it can be quite
so i think there's a lot of not
confusion but
there's a lot of complexity which you're
able to appreciate right when it comes
to your
sounds like your stepfather
uh my actual father yeah i know but
earlier we were talking about your
stepfather the the one who
drinks sometimes yeah yeah right so like
you can
your mind does a really good job of like
noticing the good and the bad which is
actually healthy
right you're not gonna like say like oh
this guy was a complete [ __ ] and
and the devil incarnate there were times
where it sounds like he was like a cool
dude and
and maybe did care about you or
something like that
and then when it comes to your dad it's
like you know that's
like he did a lot of good stuff he
pushed through a lot of things you know
like he worked really hard he like built
an engineering company
there's a lot here that i can honestly
respect
and you're also able to acknowledge
though that like
did he care about you yes
did he love you obviously
was he there for you not really
what do you how does it you want to push
back against that or what do you think
about what i just said
i think that's pretty accurate
you said he was a scout leader
yeah what does that mean a scout leader
like um
in america it's boy scouts but in canada
it's
all-inclusive i think um
and sort of the reason he did that was
you know he wanted us to
get into scouting and learn it because
you know it
provides a lot of value for growth
and learning um so i think that was part
of it
and nike was doing it for us
but at the same time when you're a scout
leader you can't
you know have favoritism over your kids
because that's just bad for the group
so no i wasn't treated like everyone
else
okay too busy asriel what are you what
are you doing
so you do this thing right you're just
talking about scouts and what do you say
i wasn't important that he didn't
it wasn't there for me yep
let's back up a little bit and connect
those dots i think that's where we were
going
but so you're good you've been watching
paying attention i don't know if
if chat was able to follow but let's
think through this right so
i'm gonna ask you now be careful because
like you started talking about scouts
and you were like he's not allowed to
show favoritism
[ __ ] where does that come from what does
that have to do with anything
right it's what you told yourself when
what happened
no he told that to me okay oh
interesting
and how did it feel having your dad as a
scout leader you are presumably
in scouts yeah
right because um
i don't know um i think i just sort of
accept it as reality
i don't really think about what it's
like
i was pretty cool actually i mean
pretty cool that have as a scout leader
um so so maybe he there there wasn't any
negative emotion there i'm curious did
you ever feel
jealous when you were in scouts
no okay so you didn't have because
sometimes people like
will have these kinds of thoughts or
feelings where you know if they didn't
feel this way
you know don't say yes but sometimes you
know i can imagine
that you're a kid who feels maybe a
little bit undervalued and so that your
mind would notice things
which actually may have been completely
fair right he's not supposed to give you
more or less attention
but if your mind was kind of hungry for
attention from your dad that maybe you
noticed he was like supporting
other kids and like you wanted him to
support you the same way
though i think it was very much
like equal like
yeah so you thought it was equal and
fair and you felt like emotionally okay
with that
yeah i accepted it for what it was and
what was it
it was just being a leader and
you know helping
the group uh learn and grow and
learn new skills and i was part of the
group
yeah absolutely it sounds like you're
very proud of your dad
yeah for sure also sounds like maybe you
felt proud of being your dad's son
i can imagine that it it can be hard or
confusing to
even now it sounds like you respect your
dad a lot and you feel proud of him
do you feel do you feel proud to be his
son
yeah sure i never thought about it but
yeah i guess so
okay i'm a little bit confused by your
response because you seem pretty
like i can imagine like you sort of
hinted at like you know you
like everyone in the troop knew that
your dad was pretty cool because he was
a scout leader and he knew all this
stuff
so actually i'm feeling like a sense of
pride there
when i ask you now what i'm hearing is a
logical answer
okay does that make sense like
i can i can i can almost feel the pride
that you felt as a kid
like you guys are out doing scout stuff
and you're like yeah that's my dad
i'm i'm not i'm not hearing that same
thing i i definitely hearing a lot of
respect for what he's built
for sure right an understanding and an
appreciation of the challenges that he's
faced and how he's like
continued to persevere through those
challenges absolutely
is he proud of you
yeah i think so um i
don't think i ever thought
that he was proud of me until recently
oh it's sort of like i left for a
university and then
you know things just changed
what changed
i don't know um i was the youngest
child in the family so once i left
you know he sort of you know he stopped
being a scout leader
um he started looking for a wife or
not a wife but a girlfriend someone else
to live with
and then
i don't know as he's being a lot more
supportive
and less
sort of aggressive like aggressive
towards
me and my achievements um
though he doesn't
i've talked to him and i it's weird
because he
doesn't seem to acknowledge that
anything has changed
yeah can i try to interpret what i heard
maybe try to string together a couple of
those dots
so i'm almost hearing that like maybe
your dad like
like his role as father was like almost
like a grind for him
it was like a duty you know he had to
make sure
that you guys got to a certain point
it's almost like he didn't have the
space to be like
proud and chill
it's like we got to get asriel to
college we got to do this we got to do
this like
it's about like getting them to where
they need to go
in a very objective sense and like
feelings are like
no room for feelings yeah
i think he sacrificed a lot for us
and now that there's space for it
he's kind of chilling a little bit maybe
feels more proud of
i you i don't know
maybe has he ever has he ever said to
you that he's proud of you
no not openly what would it be like to
hear that
uh
i don't know if that's
i don't know if that would actually do
anything
okay what makes you think that
i just like great he's proud of me now
what
it doesn't solve anything
what are we trying to solve
what's the my life and what aspects of
your life
me failing at everything do you fail at
everything
absolutely that's how it
that's my approach i i just brute force
it and i fail like
every time and you know i just do it
enough times eventually i'll get through
you know i just power through everything
okay i'm a little bit
confused um
would you could you ever ask your dad if
he was proud of you
i don't think so like why would i do
that
that's just looking for validation
that's feeding a particular beast is it
not
give me a second asriel
i think i think we've stumbled upon a
big problem
but give me just a second because i i
trust that
you're a smart dude and i trust you're
familiar with these concepts so i got to
figure out
okay here's where i'm coming from okay
bro
i don't think you're i don't i think
you're doing well on the outside world
like the whole premise of this
conversation is like you're making
outward progress
but internally it still feels bad
so like the first thing that's weird is
like i think we've run into some kind of
you know like when you're playing a game
and like the boss is at 20
health and they like develop some kind
of combo breaker super shield kind
of thing where you're like you're on
your way there and then like something
pops up and then they like
turn into some other boss and they've
like morphed i feel like that's what
just happened
because i thought the whole premise of
this conversation i realized we're being
intellectual so this may not be helpful
but like i
want you to notice this with me that
like i thought the premise of this
conversation is that
outside as your therapist puts it you're
thriving in a pandemic
i mean are you you know have you started
a billion dollar company
sounds like no and at the same time you
get there one day
absolutely man so like you'll you'll
you'll like you're you're
back in school you know you
have gotten gotten through the way in
which you failed to find a job is
progressing right you got a job you
didn't you know it was hard so like
you're still like
you're working on actually i'm not
worried about the outside world
what i think this conversation is about
is this unshakable feeling
that you have that you are not worth and
think
right that like you're not valuable
i think i have value it's what i can
accomplish and do for people around me
um no it isn't
so i know this sounds perplexing but
you have intrinsic value
you don't have to believe me you don't
have to disagree it's just what i
believe it's a belief
so i think what you were taught
is that like your value is like
dependent on your accomplishments
right that like your dad like when you
didn't do a good job like
he didn't like demonstrate to you that i
still care about you in a very like
explicit
way right he was like you need to do
better then i shall love you
there's a part of you that knows that
isn't true but like there are some
signals that he sent you that sort of
like
created that complex does that make
sense i mean you even say it when you
talk about your siblings you're like you
know i had to work so much harder to get
recognized because they were better than
i was
there's a lot of like conditionality to
like the
love right so like your value as a
person
even when it comes to your stepdad like
fluctuated
if your dad was in a bad mood there's no
intrinsic value
actually and so like the the way that
your your stepdad treated you actually
taught you that there's no
constant sense of value right like the
way you get treated
fluctuates depending on all kinds of
external things does that make sense
uh a little confused about
you are talking about how it fluctuates
with my stepdad
i think i always recognize that what he
was doing was wrong and it just became
like a 40 chess game 40 social chess
game
trying to get him to not you know get
set off
um i
i think i recognized that that was sort
of an abusive
toxic relationship and that
you know i don't think i was
i based my value on what he thought
thank you very much for clarifying that
so let me let me take a different angle
so like if we go back to your fourth
grade school example
right like the what i really interpreted
there was that your mom
sort of didn't care like she didn't
think about
your inconvenience and embarrassment
well i think the idea was that my
brother was going to the other school
because he got in the gifted program and
i didn't
and then she was sort of thinking well
why don't i just go to that school too
but she never really told anyone and
that part of that is probably because
she was
pretty probably emotional
at the time and what are you doing
you're right you can't you can't help it
so it's it's i'm not i'm not telling you
to stop
i i think it's just it's what your mind
is doing so
you're you're absolutely right man like
it's it's like a very reasonable thing
for your mom to do that right she's like
let's have my two kids together
one kid got into the gifted program so
i'm gonna move the other kid totally
fine like i don't think it's any
like moving you s to another school is
completely logical i have no issue with
that
the question is how did you feel the day
that you showed up at your old school
i think i just accepted that this is my
life now
i go to a new school and i gotta
figure out how to fit in
yep so i think acceptance is absolutely
right because what i'm hearing there
honestly and you can push back if you
want to i may be wrong
right so by all means correct me but
like what i'm hearing is that like
you're kind of an afterthought
right like it's one thing to move you
like even if we say like okay your
brother got into the gifted and talented
program we're gonna move you anyway but
like at least let you know
like i could just i'm just trying to put
myself in the shoes of a fourth grader
who shows up at their class
and their teacher is like you're no
longer a student here like can you
like that sounds so
devastatingly embarrassing to me
like it sounds like bewildering in like
clueless
now i don't even know if you went into
the classroom and you got told by your
teacher or like you know someone met you
like i don't know but like
what i'm what i'm kind of noticing is
like inconsiderateness
it's like they don't even think about
you it's almost like like your mom
didn't like think to tell you hey by the
way like she
there's no space in her mind like for
i'm not trying to be brutal here
but like you know what i'm sort of
noticing it's almost like the same thing
at work it's like does that even
anyone even notice if i don't show up
it's like a lack of noticing right like
it's a lack of like
like i'm getting the sense as real i can
see you're getting maybe a little bit
emotional but
i i like what i'm getting is like you
were taught this lesson that like
you're not worth thinking about
yeah i think that's a common theme
right and it's like it's amazing to see
you progress like especially in the high
performance group where it's like i
don't belong here
it's like objectively like you know you
can make a good argument for that but
you
absolutely belong there and the
objectivity of it doesn't matter and
like you've been able to see like you
know even though there's like
there are people who are quite advanced
in their careers here who are very
successful
like i can still make a meaningful
contribution
like that's intrinsic value
right that like no matter what your
circumstances are no matter who you're
around whether the successful
unsuccessful
you have value
and so i think what we're working on
here is not
anything to do with the outside success
because i think that you're doing
you've learned how to push through like
you're crushing it bro good
you have a ways to go absolutely but are
you making progress absolutely
what we're talking about here is that
like feeling on the inside at least
that's what i
that's what i'm focusing on it's your
you tell me otherwise
but and and this is where like i think
it's gonna be tricky because i think
what's what i'm detecting is a sense of
like
lack of intrinsic value right the first
question i think i asked you is how long
have you felt like
i don't know exactly what it was that
you weren't worth much
right you say forever so it's something
you carry with you
we can go through these different
stories about you know now that your dad
and so then when i ask you the question
like is your dad proud of you and you're
like i don't know what difference that
would make dude it's going to make all
the difference
i think i'd know how to process that
even if he did
say it you're damn right you don't which
is the entire problem
right because like how do you process
that which you've never heard before
and if we think about like what's the
problem here it's that like i know it
sounds kind of weird but like
you know this is sometimes what happens
when kids aren't told that
you're proud of them as they carry this
thing where you're just not
sure what your intrinsic value was and
you're like how can words make a
difference
and i'm not sure i mean i just and this
is where i think i think you're
incredibly frightened of asking him too
yeah i think so and so if we think about
that like we can see that sort of
doesn't
if you if what he says doesn't matter
why on earth are you scared of asking
him
maybe i just don't want to look like a
fool
yep i think you're afraid
of two things one is that he's gonna say
no
and probably more likely is he's not
gonna know how to answer the question
what do you think about that
what do you mean when like you say he
won't know how to answer it
so in the same way that you don't know
how to process
his answer he may not know how to
process the question
because it sounds like that's not
you know a scout badge that you guys
ever got
right like emotional discussions between
father and son about like what he
what you mean to him is like just
something that you guys aren't familiar
with
i think he has expressed that he cares a
lot about me
um ah that's completely different though
right i know it sounds similar but let's
be clear
i can care a lot about someone
but being proud of them is completely
different
okay there's a reason i'm not asking
about love right i'm not asking does
your dad love you because i know he
loves you you know he loves you
that's clear like he's done a good job
with that he's sacrificed for you
you know you mean a lot to him like i'm
not hearing that at all
i know it sounds weird but like you know
so for some people that's that's the
issue
but for you i think it's about pride
it's about value it's about worth
you know like like at the end of the day
when you strip away
all of your accomplishments is like are
you are you worth something
hmm i guess i'd say
not really yeah
i i think i i can see that you believe
that
and so when it comes to like nihilism
and when it comes to like
you know using frustration as fuel like
i think as long as you feel that way
like
that's gonna be tough
sorry
i think also because i had a
conversation with him recently
and like that was
you know i i explained that i was having
a rough time
whatever and in the past
but like this time i was sort of talking
about
you know how i always feel i need to
accomplish everything and
like with the job how i didn't show up
and he was just like
dude it's a summer job like are you
being so hard on yourself
and then he sort of met up my dad
okay and then it was sort of like like
where did i go wrong like where did i
mess up that
you know you ended up this way
is that what he said to you
yeah and then i was like
no i don't think you messed up i think
you know that was just me learning to
be me and
i think it was something that i taught
myself
i think i was just deflecting the blame
help me understand how you interpret
that interaction with your dad
um
well it was just
i don't know i guess it was a little bit
relieving
maybe that you know he didn't
you know push me like you know
i was the only one pushing myself that
he's not
really pushing me anymore to succeed or
whatever
no okay it's nice to let that go
i guess sort of
okay asriel i need a minute okay
all right
okay i'm gonna ask you to take a step
back from that like let's really pay
attention to what was said okay
and and i'm noticing that maybe i'm
trying to bludgeon you
into believing something does it feel
that way to you
um i don't think you can bludgeon me
into believing anything if i don't want
to
i completely agree but does it feel like
you're being bludgeoned
not saying it's working i'm asking what
it feels like
i don't know what you're trying to get
me to believe
great do you feel like i'm getting you
to believe anything i'm like pushing you
to believe something
maybe something about intrinsic value
and that
my dad is proud of me or something
okay okay okay good all right so like i
like let's listen to that statement okay
so like i'm just gonna tell the story
back as i heard it because it was a
surprising story to me so you
didn't show up for your summer job you
go to your dad and you say hey
by the way i didn't show up for my
summer job fair enough so far
or then he's like
where did i screw up with you
no what did he say tomorrow like
well it was i didn't show up you know
i've
i felt you know incredibly you know i
had an emotional breakdown
you know i was incredibly nervous and he
was like
you know why are you pushing yourself so
hard
um it's just a summer job like
it's only so much you can do um
and then you know where did i go wrong
with you
or like no i mentioned you know how i
have this
performance versus growth mindset and
trying to get out of the performance
mindset he's like i never taught you
that like
you know where do you learn that
where is i go wrong
okay what do you what do you how do you
understand the statement where did i go
wrong with you
thank you
trying to put the blame on himself maybe
and then i'm not allowing that yeah
so i completely agree so here's what
like
i think is problematic so i think this
is like some weird stuff okay so asriel
what i'm about to say there are multiple
interpretations of number one
interpretation is that
i've got something in my mind and i'm
not willing to let that go or change
that
so i could be wrong here so i'm going to
just toss this out because like this
story is
is becoming is getting a little bit more
and more unexpected
so like i think there's there's
something very supportive
about that and also like
something incredibly damning
so like like on the supportive side is
the reason you're screwed up is because
it's my fault and i wasn't good enough
of a dad
and that's better than the reason you're
screwed up is because of something that
you did
the the problem though and this is like
what i'm trying to
bludgeon you to understand is that
irrespective of who's to blame
there's a fundamental assumption that
you're screwed up
like do you see that it's like where did
i go wrong that my son
ended up like this like that is the
opposite of pride
right so like like is is he like growing
and doing better and like trying to be
like
compassionate and understanding and like
is he not
so he's grown right like so he's doing
better because he's not just saying
just be better bro he's like
where did i go wrong
so i i get what you're saying and i do
think it's like growth on his part i
don't think your dad is a bad dude by
any means
it's just like i want you to think about
when when a parent
thinks that way about a child even if
they accept responsibility for it
what does it signal to the child about
their intrinsic worth
that's a feedback loop
so it's sort of confirming
right and so that that what yeah that i
messed up
maybe yep
and so if we think about what do you use
toxic productivity to get over
it's that you're messed up
right and and like i don't think your
dad is
honestly i don't think he's a bad dude
like it's clear to me that he loves you
a lot he's made a lot of sacrifices
it's clear to me that you love him like
you know we haven't
gotten to your mom or your siblings
and what it's like to have siblings who
are in the gifted and talented
program and you're not and things like
that right so like there are a lot of
reasons like
asriel i think the problem is not that
you're stupid i think the problem is
that you're smart
the problem is that like you look around
at the world and you see older siblings
who are in the gifted and talented
program and you see yourself
and you're not the problem is that you
look around at the world and you see
like
other people who are able to do things
that you're not able to do
and the problem is that your parents see
that too
and that's a given in their mind and i
think it's those
little statements which if he's saying
that now like i'm curious what did he
say to you in high school what did he
say to you before
you know it sounds like he said push
through push through push through
but what i'm really not hearing is that
like he's been proud of what you've
accomplished
whereas i am hearing that like you're
starting to be proud in what you've
accomplished like you're not comparing
yourself to other people what i'm
hearing you learned in group
is people like even when you are not
proud of yourself
they are proud for you
does that make sense and so how do you
learn
pride in yourself it's because like when
you don't feel proud of yourself but you
have done something
to be proud of other people are proud
for you and when they said that to you
like for the first time asriel
how did you feel
i think i denied it absolutely
because your entire life you've been
taught
that you're not someone to be proud of
and you're a smart kid so you learned
that lesson
and now you carry it with you
and it takes time and effort like you've
already started to put your
life together but it's i think you
really like it's hard to learn how to be
proud of yourself
because when you say your dad doesn't
know how to respond to that statement
neither do you it's like a foreign
concept
like asriel is a good human being who
makes the world a better place
is like a foreign concept
i can logically give you a thousand
reasons
maybe even convince you
like i could say that like like asriel
do you sometimes wonder if the world
wouldn't not necessarily be a better
place but just that if you
cease to exist the world would not bat
an eyelash
do you ever think that way
yes yeah i think so right so like
watch for it so like you showed up here
in march of 2020 and you took
the waste of space that is asriel you
showed up we had a conversation
and i could say that thousands or tens
of thousands or hundreds of thousands of
people
benefited from you showing up there
and that you're showing up today and
you're being
waste of space asriel and thousands or
tens of thousands or hundreds of
thousands of people
who have had parents like yours who have
loved them but never been proud of them
are beginning to realize this they're
beginning to realize that like oh my god
the way that i think about myself is
because
even though my parents loved me like
their disappoint
their disappointment in me was a given
and if i were to tell you that you have
made all of their lives a tiny bit
better
in the same way that every person who
has come on stream has made your life a
tiny bit better
what would you say to that
i don't know i i guess that's a good
thing
okay guess it's a good thing yes it is
and who made that good thing possible
you see how hard it is it's so [ __ ]
hard isn't it
you're like
you're trying so hard not to admit it
even though like logically you're
trapped in a corner it's like
you feel that it's like you can't
have value
like tell me i'm wrong
if that's what you want to tell me tell
me i'm wrong
explain it to me give me all the reasons
why those people are benefiting
why every person on stream has helped
you and that help has been real
but you are incapable of helping anyone
in the audience tell me
say what you ever like say whatever you
want don't let me bludgeon you fight
back
i don't i know really have anything to
fight back with
okay good
it's just hard to
comprehend maybe yeah
so that's that's that's good asriel
that's really good actually you can
fight back if you feel like it if your
mind is telling but when i fight back i
mean like
if your mind is saying things to you
that you're like dismissing
you can share those things but is it
saying things to you
no okay how did it feel
how did it feel to hear me say that
that you are making a world the world a
better place
by being you in showing up here
to be honest i try not to think about it
that just makes me nervous
that's really healthy
it seemed to me like you got a little
emotional while i was you know
talking yeah i i guess it just came out
what emotion was that i had trouble
telling if that was a bad emotion or a
good emotion
i don't know just
i um i don't know
okay i think it was good
yeah so i i think that's just never had
anyone do that before
do what before
maybe
uh um validate my experience
or like you know show me
you know what i'm actually doing that it
matters
yeah so my hope is that it was a good
emotion i think it was a good emotion
and i understand why it may have been
confusing to you
because that is what feeling valued
feels like
so if i i don't really know i'm not i
mean i can't see your emotions but like
generally speaking what i was doing in
that moment
was like appreciating you for who you
are
and being like grateful that like you
exist
and and it's it's kind of sad but like
sometimes people don't know what that
feels like
right so it can be confusing the first
time we feel emotional i don't know if
that's actually what you felt or not but
like in this moment i'm
deeply grateful that you are the person
that you are
i don't want you to be better i don't
want you to be worse
i don't want you to be smarter i don't
want you to be anything except for what
you are
because what you are is like absolutely
enough like that's the premise
of what we do here is that you can be as
broken or as perfect as you want to be
you can be a gigantic streamer or you
can be
someone from our community and you can
come here and what you are
can make the world a better place
uh i wanna
i don't think it's that i make the world
a better place if i
just come here and i don't do anything
like i have to
do something talk about something i
agree
that's what i appreciate
like i appreciate what you showed up
here like how you showed up here and
that you haven't been afk for the last
hour and a half
right like if you had been afk like it's
been hard dude like you've come here and
you've done something hard
that's what i appreciate like i don't
care about i mean have you achieved a
good result i think
so but even if you hadn't i think it's
the showing up that matters
what do you help me understand where you
are mentally right now
uh i don't
i mean i'm understanding you but i
don't feel anything about it that's okay
i think that's that's all we can hope
for actually so i think you felt
something a little while ago
and i think that's enough so here's what
i'd say
do you have questions asriel
uh
[Music]
now i can't think of anything right now
okay so um would it
is it okay if i try to summarize i mean
we can
in my mind i think we've reached a good
stopping point how do you feel
uh what time is it well i mean we still
have time we've got
we've got about 15 20 minutes left oh
what that went fast
yeah we've been at this for an hour and
a half
okay um i i i
if if it's okay with you i'd like to
kind of summarize why i feel this is a
good stopping point and maybe like try
to share with you what my experience of
this conversation is
and then i definitely want you know if
there are things that we didn't get to
i want to give you the space to say hey
what about this this or this or
i still want to know about this okay is
that cool
okay so first of all you showed up here
in march of 2020
and you were struggling you were
overthinking a lot you were very outcome
oriented you didn't have a whole lot of
confidence in yourself
you didn't really know how to take
action it sounds like you've
made immense pro you've spent a lot of
time and energy
in growing as a person you did coaching
seems like that was good coaching helped
you get into therapy so it sounds like
maybe you had some concerns about going
to therapy and things like that
and and maybe coaching helped you kind
of overcome those which is one of the
outcomes of coaching that we're actually
studying now is helping people get into
therapy
you did therapy for a while it sounds
like you found like a pretty good cbt
therapist but that your sessions were a
little bit
short they helped you you came in with a
goal they helped you kind of accomplish
that goal
but it also sounds like some of the
emotional work that you were hoping to
do you really didn't get a chance to do
in therapy
yeah i think part of that was just that
i
didn't because it was about the
like finishing school and all that more
than it was about
yes it was about feeling better as well
i don't know i mean i'll let you guys go
yes like like i said
you've said several times that the the
goals of the therapy that you set out
for were accomplished
and at the same time i'm noticing that
maybe you wanted something a little bit
more but that financial
constraints also kind of limited what
you were able to do in therapy so you
came back to us you found yourself in
the high performance group and being a
little bit confused
and maybe feeling out of sorts but that
you've learned
how to be confident essentially right
like
and recognize that like even though
objectively you may not fit in some ways
that you have value in the group and you
can make meaningful contributions
even though you're still a student and
some people in there
have started companies with you
so now when we when you came on here we
were talking about this pattern right
that you've actually started to make a
lot of progress
in your outward life you're actually in
the process of putting your life
together
in a very real way you finished two
years of college
you are trying to get a job or you got a
job you didn't show up and
and whatnot that's okay once again you
know you're on your journey
um and the main
thing that maybe you could use help with
is that even though you've started to
push aside some of those negative
feelings
you actually through your own
introspective work have discovered
that you have some degree of toxic
productivity that you kind of like
push past some of those feelings and you
actually use shame and like a sense of
like oh i'm so pathetic to drive
yourself forward
in a very like outward way but that
there's still this internal stuff that
like
is hard to deal with although i'm
hearing that on a day-to-day mood
basis that you're actually feeling like
somewhat better than a year ago
so i yeah can i
add like um i was wondering you
mentioned at the beginning that there
was another way to overcome that hump
without the shame i was just wondering
you know what that was
yeah so there's alternate coping
mechanisms to overcome
the negative emotion and there is
lowering the burden of negative emotion
okay so the alternate coping mechanisms
would be like
let me just think of an example so like
a simple like so when we talk about
dharma right like you can do
things out of dharma or you can do them
out of toxic productivity okay
so that's sort of like you know you show
up to the job and you just see what you
can do
type of thing yeah so that i think is
more action orientation but not see what
you can do
that's a step in the right direction
that's moving away from an outcome
orientation to an action orientation i
would say dharma is like when you show
up
like you're showing up for like a reason
besides toxic productivity
so like this is where this is where like
you know you show up and then you kind
of say to yourself
i'm not saying you should say this it's
just the only thing that comes to your
mind
let's say hypothetically you're going to
come on stream one year later
and then like what you're saying is like
i need to like learn how to do this
so that when i share things with people
who are like where i was i can like help
them
understand what this process is like i
have to learn how to be okay in this job
so that if i ever meet someone else
who's like struggling like i can help
them
like i get that you want to be a marine
biologist but let's say like you decided
you wanted to become a psychologist and
if you want to help people who's
you know who are struggling with that
like you you have some broader
like purpose that matters to you so you
can say like okay i need to make money
so that i can support xyz
so their motivations besides toxic
productivity basically
okay and then what we did today was
um talking about sort of how i haven't
felt pride and then
that would be dealing with the bump that
i have to overcome
absolutely right so like what is that
emotional energy that you have to
overcome
with toxic productivity and that i think
is
is so you mentioned a bunch of emotions
right you said sadness i realize that
there's sadness and there's
fear and there's you know shame but
based on talking to you what i'm really
hearing is that like somewhere like
really at the core of it
i think asriel is like just the sense
that you're not worth much
you know and and i think that there have
been times in your life and it didn't it
didn't take you long
to kind of say how long have you felt
that way fourth grade and i think that's
when it start
like that's like the first time that i
don't think you understood that then but
when i ask you the question now like
you're able to go back to fourth grade
and kind of say
this is the first time that like i
really felt like someone didn't
bother to think about me
i think it was the first time i think it
was just
a more extreme example yeah okay so
that's
even more devastating right because that
means it happened before that
and and so then we kind of got to
talking a little bit about like you know
how did you come to believe that you
[Music]
aren't worth being proud of
and so this is where we got into the dad
bashing once again i don't i'm not
trying to bash your dad it's just i
think sometimes as parents
we all do this like i do this to my kids
we say things to them that have
psychological impacts because no one is
a perfect parent
and and the psychological impacts
despite the love
despite the caring despite the sacrifice
because it sounds like objectively your
dad was a really good dad
you respect him a lot you love him a lot
it sounds like he started to like
reshape his life and even put his
romantic interests aside
to care for you guys
and you know we're not even gonna get to
like what he thought about your stepdad
and whether he heard about that and all
that kind of crap
but well i i
he definitely thought that you know my
stepdad was a bit of a meathead
yeah so i'm hearing that your dad really
put his life on hold and made a lot of
sacrifices
to try to help you guys as much as
possible and he's actually a really good
dad
and he never told you he was proud of
you
and that even though he blames himself
it's still sort of like he still kind of
believes that you're kind of like
you know you're in the bargain bin of
children
which is like such a devastating thing
to feel right there's the gifted and
talented siblings and then there's you
and so like i think that like it's it's
devastating it makes me feel like an
[ __ ] saying that phrase i've never
said that before but it feels so
devastating
and if that's what you kind of grew up
with that's why you believe that about
yourself
right you've been conditioned and now
hopefully through group and some of
these other experiences you can learn to
actually recognize and like
even when i sort of said like asriel
like you are making the world a better
place by existing
i mean not just by existing because like
you're doing more than existing
right even if you may not have become
quote unquote
overwhelmingly successful the fact that
you are on
this journey in the fact that you do put
yourself outside of your comfort zone
and like you do genuinely enrich and
and improve the world around you and
it's not because of performance it's
like because you just show up
and you give it all you've got and
that's all
the world needs from you it's just for
you to be you and give it all you've got
the world doesn't need you to be you and
give it nothing
right then you really are like not
delivering value well when i show up and
i give it all i got
um you know i i often feel like it's not
enough
yeah that's the intrinsic value isn't it
absolutely well perfect
right because like because you're
starting from a basis
of like i'm in the bargain bin
and and so like no matter like how good
of a find you get in the bargain bin
as long as you remember oh i got this
from the bargain bin you're gonna
actually like
you know it's like a little bit scuffed
got it on discount whereas no like
it's a steal dude it's like worth every
penny and worth way more than i paid for
it
your value is actually far above what
you estimate it to be
and so going forward i i encourage you
to really like
you know ask yourself when you as you
start to introspect and you start to
feel these negative emotions like
does this come back to you know i'm not
valuable
and and to try to see and this is going
to be the really hard part is like there
are going to be times in your life where
you
are valuable because and i think you've
started to discover this
but even if i tell you you're gonna push
back like when you show up
in group like you help people
what do you think about that
i don't
it's so hard oh my god you told me
earlier in this conversation that i
realize now that i can still make
contributions
yeah but it's but yeah right i don't
know if those contributions help
necessarily yes beautiful right i make
contributions but oh they're not as
valuable as other people's
it's so hard to just be like no you're
you do good damn you
and that's me bludgeoning you so it's
it's gonna take time so be patient with
yourself faster be patient okay
like it's fine to have that voice it's
fine to like no matter what we send it
just see how it's like always gonna like
contort and twist and just like devalue
like because like that
it just doesn't compute in your mind
right like it doesn't compute in your
mind that you could show up somewhere
like have an impact on another human
being
it's like um it's like i'm in the matrix
i'm neo-dodging the bullets
absolutely dude and just like the matrix
it's completely op
it's like boston it's completely unfair
to those of us who are sending you the
bullets of appreciation
it's like we don't stand a chance
against that man
yeah you're dodging you're really good
and i i think you know you you do this a
lot right so then the last thing that
i'll kind of leave you with
is this sort of idea of like what amount
to blame
and just be careful about where you
assign it and how you protect people
because like
dude come on man like i i'm pretty sure
that so chad is learning this blows my
mind
i'm pretty sure that when when you
literally said that your stepdad
you know had a lot of challenges like
everyone knew that abuse was coming
like you know like we've heard it enough
times
right like let's not even get started on
your mom and like we just had an
interview like on wednesday about you
know
blaming the good parent for
or trying really hard not to hold the
good parent responsible for like
letting the bad parent do things to you
and just to add to that i think in the
end she did
start to stand up for us you know
um there was a breakup and then he moved
out for a bit
and then they went to a therapist and
tried to work through it
and they got back together and so
there's definitely growth on her part
too yeah
yeah good what does that mean for you
don't know right so yes i'm still here
yeah so like there's a part of me that
wants to say too little too late
but you'll push back against that right
i think you said that last time too
what was i talking about your mom nope
well you're talking about
that relationship same thing okay pretty
much
anyway we don't have to get into it but
that's that's where like i think so
asriel i think like dude you're well on
your journey it sounds like you've made
a lot of external change
and and what i really think is that
something tells me that i don't know if
you're interested in a romantic
relationship if you're in a romantic
relationship but like this is the kind
of thing that as you start to work on i
think a romantic relationship will
become
more available and also like easier to
exist within
yeah but but i think when it comes to
dating like if people who
feel intrinsically like they have very
little value have a lot of trouble
in dating because it's very confusing
when someone seems to be genuinely
interested in them
and then they're just like they don't
know like like you know that when i tell
you something and you like you just
can't
you just gotta say button and like so
that
so so this is the kind of thing where i
think like continue growing man and just
kind of notice this like
you know continue making the world a
better place as you are
and like you know learn how to be proud
of yourself
and then if one day you know
if you grow a pair you can ask your dad
if he's proud of you
and it may be a hard question that asks
and it may be a hard question to answer
but we'll get there one day
i was joking about growing a pair i
think you're actually very brave
is it was a twitch memeing i just wanted
to clarify i wasn't sure if
i would be interpreted the wrong way
because it just occurred to me that
maybe with the way that you interpret
things
you know thoughts
questions before we wrap up
i think that's about it in regards to
their relationships
i'm not i don't have one and i'm not
currently looking
i think there's definitely a lot of
fear and confusion around that as well
so yeah i think you're right
yep so i i think as you work through
this
the relationship will come
so don't don't worry about it just keep
walking what you're walking and i'm
confident
that you'll end up happy
and in a place where you're you know
you're good
all right do you want to meditate
we can try it i've done some of your
meditations on previous streams but
i haven't noticed it have much effect on
me
would you can you help me understand
what your experience of those
meditations
is
i think uh sometimes maybe i feel
something a little bit but it's
like like i know sometimes chat mentions
you know they had this crazy experience
and for me it's like
i don't know nothing really changed that
much i still
feel the same way okay maybe my thoughts
are a little less
but what what usually happens when you
meditate what's your experience of
meditating
i think maybe i get a little bit calmer
um
maybe a little more relaxed but nothing
no
do you think when you meditate
sometimes i guess it depends on the
meditation
all right let me think
i was thinking um if you had anything to
say
when i get extremely anxious or
something something that could like
ground me
in that moment so i don't get carried
away
what happens when you get extremely
anxious
tell me about that
i think i just like my mind wanders i
start thinking about everything
you know i try to prepare as much as i
can i get really stressed
um that's where
you know i have that nervous meltdown in
front of the job site
that's where i try to suppress it with
frustration towards myself
um okay have you tried
practicing kapalbhati or the rapid
exhalations
have you done that before
yeah i think so so
i would say and how many
okay so let's for people for whom
meditation hasn't really worked on
stream let's just go through a couple of
basics okay
the first is that meditation is a skill
that sometimes requires practice
so what we try to do on stream so
the reason we teach different meditation
techniques on stream is because
different people will naturally
hopefully have a good experience in
meditation
using a particular technique the
challenge is that
um you know when it comes to the scope
of techniques that i teach
i teach probably like 10 to 15 percent
of what i would use
with people that i work with on a
regular basis
and that's because these are the
techniques which are like easy
accessible and you can't really screw up
they also so there there's like a whole
host of other techniques which are
you know more dangerous but are also
more powerful
there's a whole host of techniques that
require more guidance
or like subsequent amounts of teaching
to really anchor people into practice so
we're really kind of handicapped
in some ways um
so what i would say for
you is that we should practice
kapalbhati again let's give it another
shot
i'll actually guide you through it so
it's going to be rapid exhalations and
that's mainly because
it's a physiologic technique so like
when you're feeling
anxious like that your sympathetic
nervous system is going to be active
so you're going to have adrenaline and
things like that so there's a really
interesting way to rein in your
sympathetic nervous system which is to
become actually
temporarily hypocarbic so what we're
going to do is rapidly exhale
which is going to decrease the co2 level
and when your co2 level drops that
actually is going to change your
respiratory drive and really slow you
down
so hopefully it'll kind of crack the
overthinking cycle
by like literally sort of like shutting
off your mind
over time yeah go ahead that's like the
one where it's sort of like
hyperventilating
you know isn't it yes exactly have you
done that one before
sounds like you have yeah yeah i didn't
think
once or twice so so the other thing for
whatever reason i don't know why this is
actually i do know why this is but it's
so people will say like even when they
watch meditation on stream
and then when i actually do it with them
on stream that sometimes it has a
differential effect
not quite sure why that is i have
theories or things written in ancient
texts
um but you know for now let's just give
it a shot because i think and i would
just encourage you to practice the
technique because it's sort of like
you know swimming isn't great exercise
the first time you get in the water you
have to like learn how to swim
and then it can be a very healthy form
of exercise
long term what i would strongly
recommend asriel is you probably need to
do some kind of
sun gulp oriented meditation so i would
say if you have a set of prayer beads
fantastic if not get one
and like this is one of those things
where you need to start like internally
wiring
you're like rewiring like the way that
you think about yourself
okay um
[Music]
and i'm trying to think about so there's
some kind of sun gulp around worth
but let me just think about
let me just think
yeah i i'm gonna have to think about
what that sun gulp will be
i may dm you if it comes to all right
yeah i am i do have a bracelet i can't
there it is it's not really
it's not really a prayer beads
i don't know get through here get prayer
bees
all right yeah let me just think about
let's do kapalbhati today and let me
just give me just like 30 seconds to try
to come up with some cup and then i'll
that's not it
yeah i i can't think of anything in this
moment but sometimes i
i think of these things actually when i
meditate
it it's just
yeah let me just i'm drawing a blank
it's like right at the edge
i feel it it's just not coming to so
let's stick with kaupalpathi okay
let me just send you a random dm at some
point though
um all right so
so with kapalbhati you may want to blow
your nose
we've got boogies and stuff if not gg
all right one sec
okay so sit up straight
and remember we're gonna do abdominal
breathing
so do you remember how to do so for
people who need a guide what we're going
to do is
as we inhale we're going to push the
stomach out
so expand your abdomen
and as you exhale pull the abdomen in
contract good so breathe in and pull the
abdomen out
big big belly and then exhale
and then let the abdomen come in
okay now we're going to do the
kapalbhati part so we're going to take a
deep breath and it's going to be
rapid exhalations i'll demonstrate for
about nine rounds okay so i'll take a
deep breath
in
[Laughter]
okay and when you do it what i want you
to do is focus on your stomach
and you can like almost like spasm that
stomach and push that air out
okay so let's have you do it let me just
observe you so deep breath in and do
like nine breaths
good perfect okay so now we're gonna do
it together we're gonna do
let's start with 15 okay so it's going
to be 15 breaths
there's going to be a period of silence
where you're going to just
let your breathing do what it wants to
don't necessarily
try to think but also don't get too
tense about
you know pushing thoughts out of your
head just let them come and let them go
and just sit
in the space post meditation okay we'll
do 15 breaths we'll sit for about 30
seconds
i'll bring you back after that okay so
take a deep breath in and begin
all right you can leave your eyes closed
now we're going to go to
20 so 20 breaths
followed by a period of silence deep
breath in
and begin
okay now we're gonna go up to
when you're ready go ahead come on back
of course what was that like for you
i didn't notice that uh maybe i got a
little lightheaded at the end
which i guess was the point
um i don't know i feel calmer
yeah so i'd practice i'd say 33 breaths
three times so you want to work your
way up to like 33 exhalations maybe a
minute
or two in between for a total of like
somewhere around five to seven minutes
of practice
okay i might have um
messed up the beginning because i
thought you meant like 15 like
breathe in and do the out nine times
four or fifteen times oh that's fine
i mean yeah that wasn't that wasn't what
i was saying but you know that's a lot
which is fine yeah so like i'd say 33
exhalations for
one set and do three sets
like raps and sets so 33 reps
one is one set and then you know if
you're starting to
have like help if you're starting to
feel anxious
you know if you find yourself once again
at like that job kind of situation i'd
start with kapalbhati
you can add on alternate nostril
breathing afterward for about five to
seven minutes and hopefully that'll calm
you down unless you're having like a
truly clinical panic attack
in which case that may be insufficient
but it still helps
okay and then just you know calm it down
and then by the time you get your prayer
beads i will hopefully have something
for you
so go find some and if it takes you six
months then i've got six months if it
takes you
a month then that's how long i've got
okay uh what are the requirements for
the prayer beads like would i need
actual ones
or yeah so i would get some kind of
set of like any religious tradition
prayer beats so like if you
have a catholic background you can get a
rosary
if you don't i would recommend something
from like the meditative traditions so
like buddhism or hindu or whatever you
can get like amala from
you know wherever um
you know be careful about the
fashionable ones
so i know it's kind of hard but try to
get something that feels a little bit
authentic ideally if there's actually
like
i don't know where you live but if
there's like a buddhist monastery or
temple somewhere near you
i would call them and say hey do you
guys have like a place that i can get
some prayer beads
um maybe we just need to
note to self okay
gotta think about getting those for
y'all but
um but that's that's what i would
recommend
yeah i yeah
and then you can abduct me into the
cults yeah
we will induct it the abduction comes
for the people who are not willing to be
inducted
so you're okay the abduction comes for
your siblings
abduction and induction very different
very different
right so asriel thanks a lot for coming
on man
it's been awesome to see how much you've
how far you've come
and you know good luck with the rest of
your journey bro
yeah thank you take care
all right you too
chat
you